there are several hard problems when
designing software I'm not talking about
computer science hard problems like
np-complete things I mean hard problems
of design and internationalization is
one of the worst let's imagine you've
started a social network let's imagine
that you've made it for english-speaking
users first problem is when someone
called chloe joins because Chloe has an
umlaut above her E and is angry that you
can't put a name in properly so okay say
I'll open up and add a few more accented
characters well then someone Icelandic
calls in and he's got an F in his name
looks like that sounds like fine you say
so
let's use all of you Nicola and then
someone promptly breaks your site
because there's control characters in
Unicode that break everything okay fine
so you you work out which characters are
allowed to be used in names and you just
stick to those I mean that's like 30,000
characters when you include all of
Chinese Japanese and Korean tax but
nevermind you put it in and then you
start getting some users in other
countries first problem you get is
France your French translator calls and
says look you've got a light button here
and what I want to put in is Jen I like
but it's not quite big enough I need to
make the button bigger and there's
problems like this all over the place
where sentences that take five syllables
in English actually take a whole two
paragraph description in some other
language so you tweak the design you
make it so that the lengths of texts can
change and then you start working out of
what you really want to do is have some
kind of drop in system so in English you
can just put in name likes this and then
you can send that over the translators
and see this is where I should really
speak more than one language but they
can send back I'm going to make up a
language here they can say something
like manner name hard we love which in
their language means sound so likes it's
great that systems going to work you can
just send a load of text blocks to them
and they can send it but hello ah Italy
yes what's what's right you need to know
the gender of everyone using this
network why do you need to know Italian
language relies on gender the words in
the sentence change depending on whether
you're talking about a man or a woman
that's that's irritating to you
asked users for gender Facebook have
this exact problem but ok you start
asking and the translator starts sending
back strings and now of course anyone
who doesn't fit immediately into male or
female and if that surprises you you
need to get out more
but anyone who doesn't fit into those
categories well now they're angry that
they have to go into one or the other
you have to ask them well languages
don't support that which one are we
going with and in fact there's a lot of
translators calling back and saying they
can't support that ok you move past that
you damp down the storm and it moves on
and then you get a call from France
again they say by the way you've got a
singular or plural here but you can't
use the plural for 0 we don't say that
something has no likes we say that it
has no like and one like and then to
light so ok back I can put a put a
special case into that and a few others
calling and say um yeah we don't just
have singular and plural we have
singular and dual and plural our words
change depending on whether there's one
of something 2 of something or many of
something ok great right special case in
for that and then then your polish
translator calls they say right we've
got out we've got a pourcel Paul suppose
we're you have a singular and then you
have a different plural depending on
whether the number of things ends with
two three and four or some other digit
okay great fine put a special case in
for that many romanian translator calls
yet we need a different plural for any
group of objects greater than 20 okay
and then then you finally get every
different plural rule from every
language in there and now the translator
are vaguely happy then your Icelandic
translator calls and they say right
you've got this percent name thing that
I'm just meant to replace Icelandic
changes he'll the names appear depending
on what else is in the sentence you
might have Tom then it might become Tom
ah or Tommy and there are whole names
but this doesn't work with because they
don't fit the Icelandic pattern you put
all that in somehow and then then your
German translator calls it's like look
you've got you've got this uppercase and
lowercase in you want to put stuff in in
big bold uppercase letters sometimes I
get that
but we have this double s character when
you turn it to uppercase becomes two S's
except sometimes when it doesn't like in
geographic names can you deal with that
okay right yes oh I'll make sure I'll
make sure you deal with that but that's
not even staff it because then yeah
Arabic translator calls and they say
right you're doing this thing where
you're taking an excerpt from a post
you're taking the first 50 characters
and then just putting a dot dot on the
end and that works for some languages
but not in Arabic you can't just chop a
word in half because the letters in one
bit of the word change depending on the
letters elsewhere they all merge
together into one nice flowing thing and
computers can deal with that but you
can't just crop it halfway through okay
fine doubled and then the Arabic
translation goes on to say but you're
dealing with right-to-left text right
course you know you haven't thought of
that because because surely all
languages go left right no Arabic Hebrew
and they go right to left that's okay I
kind of flipped the whole design round
so it still works that way I think yeah
that that would work but then you're
gonna have left-to-right names in the
middle of right-to-left text because
you're going to talk about someone who
has their name in a different character
so just make sure it can deal with that
oh then if you're British or American
translator calls or vice versa let's say
you need to make sure the date format is
right because Americans for some bizarre
reason do month/day/year Brit day month
year and by the way in America the Week
starts on a Sunday and in Britain the
Week starts there Monday so you gotta
change all your calendars around by the
way Europe what's 24 hour clocks and
America wants 12 hour clocks in and
numbers
oh girl we haven't start on numbers yet
because Europe wants two hundred and
fifty six thousand three hundred forty
one point to the comma and the full stop
or the period if you're American they're
round the other way okay you can deal
with that and then then the icing on the
cake is your Indian translator calls and
says they have the Indian numbering
system you don't say 100,000 they have
the crore and the lakh so they would
group it like that and it all becomes
incredibly overly complicate
and the last time I did a runt like this
I said that what you do is you get
someone else as timezone code and you
treat it as a black box
but that doesn't work here because
languages are infinitely more complex
and subtle and there are so many changes
that will be unique to whatever it is
you're designing the the black box that
Facebook uses for translation won't work
for whatever you're doing it won't work
if you're designing software for Windows
or Mac or Linux or iPhone you can you
can use certain references certain
functions certain little things to make
it easier but ultimately you are going
to have to go out to translators and
deal with all of this wonderful mess or
you do what programmers have done for
many years and say yeah we're just
producing it in English we'd like to
thank audible.com for sponsoring this
computerphile video they've got loads of
books online for you to choose from
if you go to audible.com slash
computerphile there's a chance to check
out a book for free today I'd like to
recommend ghost in the wires which is
the story about kevin Mitnick one of the
most infamous hackers there's been it
had me captivated from the sample you
can listen to on audibles website and it
is just fascinating and gripping stuff
so get over to audible.com slash
computerphile
try out a book for free and thanks once
again to audible.com for sponsoring this
video part of our hobby response at the
top but as we look down we've actually
started to get some interesting
information out of the server in this
case what the referring URL was